
The role of leadership in democracy is a principle which opposes the core values of democracy itself and it presents challenges which have not been fully addressed and resolved. The balance between the core principles of democracy in theory and the need for a leader in practice has given rise to difficulties surrounding the power vested in both the people and their elected representatives. “The core animating principle of democracy is  popular sovereignty, the idea that the people should rule. Yet democratic leaders inevitably exercise far more authority than ordinary citizens” (Kane 25). Democracies must navigate the problem of leadership and the balance of power within their regime in order to maintain the trust of their citizens.
Democratic Leadership Serving the Interests of the Citizens
	In a representative democracy, such as seen in the United States, the citizens elect their leaders and hope to put people in positions of power who support their interests. However, the power of the people is threatened by any source of leadership because it gives elected representatives a place to make decisions which may not always reflect what the people want. The need for leadership in a place that denounces inherent rule creates an environment of ebb and flow where the leader is under constant pressure to earn and maintain the trust of the citizens. 
	The goal of democracy for the people is to eliminate the entitlement of power at all costs. In democracy, no one has the inherent right to lead over a group of people even if the qualities they possess are seen to be favorable. The only way a leader can be positioned in power is through elections in democracies, such as the United States, where the people decide who should be placed in power based upon a majority vote. Elections allow the people to make their own judgments about which leaders exemplify the qualities which they desire. “The people recognize that elections allow them to make comparative judgements about qualifications for office” (Galston 111). Leaders are elected based on the premise that the people believe this leader to have their best interests in mind. This allows the people to maintain power in a democracy and they can ultimately decide the leadership of their regime. “The people have the right to make mistakes, but only their decisions can confer legitimacy” (Galston 110). The people may make mistakes in electing a leader but the only way to maintain the legitimacy of the system is to stand by the decisions that were made by the people.  
	The people favor leaders which they can relate to on many levels including leaders who they see as having the upbringing of an ordinary citizen. Citizens like leaders who empower the free-will of the people and those who are honest and upfront with them, constantly keeping the people informed on what decisions have been made and what is to come in the future. This thought comes from the principles which American citizens find to be the most important. American citizens dislike decisions that threaten the liberty that they so desperately hang on to. “The people resent individuals who visibly regard themselves as superior to their fellow citizens and they also fear a government that expands its power in a way that threatens liberty” (Galston 113).  American citizens also dislike leaders which they cannot relate to. Many Americans pursue the “American dream” and they believe they can achieve this with hard work and honesty. Leaders who directly oppose this way to power are disliked by the American citizens because they believe this leader has not endured the struggles necessary to be placed in positions which give them the power to lead. The leaders we elect can have similar qualities and upbringings of citizens but it is unrealistic to expect the ideals and situations of our leaders to be exactly the same as the citizens. If that were true then leaders would not have any qualities that differ from the citizens by which they are elected.
The Challenges that Democratic Leaders Face
	Democratic leadership has challenges in itself and leadership in democracy contradicts its own core values. In a place such as the United States having any kind of leadership has the ability to threaten some of their rights including the power of free-will. ‘Give me Liberty or Give me Death’ exemplifies the importance of their basic rights. “Political leadership is qualitatively different from other kinds of rule in that it is governance over free and equal persons ” (Galston 106). Leadership is a relationship between a leader and its followers where the leader must realize the needs of the citizens and persuade its followers to trust them to do the right thing to resolve issues.
A great democratic leader has characteristics which appeal to the citizens they lead because of the need to put trust into a person in a position of power where the setting is not one-dimensional.  “Good rulers are the same as the virtues of good men, which are the same in all times and circumstances” (Galston 106). This means that all people are capable of being good leaders if they harness the favorable qualities for their situation. The definition of good leadership changes depending on the capacity for persuasion throughout different circumstances. This relates to multicultural environments because different cultures have their own unique combination of values and challenges which in turn makes the scope of persuasion for leaders specific to their own circumstances. “ the essence of politics is coordination of wills through persuasion rather than through unquestioning obedience” (Galston 106).  For a leader to be considered satisfactory by their citizens they must satisfy the sources of character, emotion, and argument in the environment which they lead. “They promote a regime’s distinctive ends. If the end of democracy is liberty, then democratic citizens will prize traits seen as defending liberty” (Galston 107). If a leader possesses traits that reflect and honor a regime’s core beliefs the citizens will therefore find this leader satisfactory. The challenge for a leader is having the ability to analyze and identify which beliefs, goals, and traits are most important to their citizens so they can properly manage their time and resources. The United States has its own distinctive culture which makes the challenges for a leader unique to their country. A leader will therefore have to tailor their style of leadership to match this unique set of challenges in order to meet the needs of their citizens. “They must balance competing loyalties to their electorate, their party, and their country” (Galston 113). Leaders have to constantly keep the relationships which got them into their leadership position in good standing in order to stay in a position of power. When leaders are elected much of their work has just begun because they must constantly balance these relationships while fulfilling the needs of the people.
Advantages of Democratic Leadership
Citizens under democratic leadership desire for their well-being and want their issues to be heard and resolved, but they do not always think about how the solutions will impact the lives of others. The solutions citizens offer for their own problems can often be solutions in search of problems. This makes democratic leadership even more important for the well-being of all citizens as good leaders are able to look at full situations from a different perspective. “Good Democratic leaders combine capability and legitimacy: they have the attributes needed to exercise power wisely while respecting the ongoing need for public authorization” (Galston 117). There is often tension between what is seen as a government by the people and one that is for the people. Another key advantage of democratic leadership is that leaders have the power to place the focus on issues when they see fit. Timing is a vital key to resolving issues and leaders that are able to take advantage of their power at the right time show the beauty of having leaders in democracy. At the same time, leaders must remain connected to their community and use their ability to listen in order to suit the needs of their citizens. “Another key requirement of democratic leadership is the capacity to understand what is required in particular circumstances to maximize persuasion and popular consent” (Galston 118). Gaining public support and the trust of the citizens relies heavily on allocating resources to the right issues at the right time when momentum for public support will be at its highest. “Democratic politics at its best is the use of publicly authorized power to advance the common good. Would-be leaders, then, can fail in two ways: they may be unable to obtain public support for their agenda, or they may win support by advocating only what the people want to hear” (Galston 123). People respect a leader who will do their job and lead the country in the way that got them elected which means staying true to the objectives presented before election. A favorable leader is one who is there to take responsibility for all the battles good or bad and is able to be honest with the public on what actions should be taken to keep the people at the best place possible.
Disadvantages of Democratic Leadership
Democracy has been challenged by elite individuals who have a high standing in society. These individuals challenge democracy because they intend to lead often for their own benefit rather than for the prosperity of the citizens. “Throughout history, democracies have struggled against both populism and elitism, often in the form of individuals who present themselves as potential leaders” (Galston 105). The greatest challenge of leadership in democracy is that leadership challenges the core values of free-will. “Supporters of democracy who believe in the necessity of leadership “must reconcile this with the belief that none among equals has any innate or inherent right to rule over others.” (Galston 108). The people can be influenced by emotion and can therefore make decisions which are ultimately detrimental to their own interests. “Although well-designed institutions can reduce the odds of damaging mistakes, they cannot eliminate the possibility that voters in their least wise and moderate moments will act in ways that undermine their own interests and those of the country” (Galston 111). American citizens want to trust their leader to do best for them, not to have unwavering confidence in them to make their own decisions for the people. Just because leaders are elected and put in positions of power does not mean they will fulfill all promises and goals they set in order to gain that position. The beauty of democracy is that the people can decide at the end of their term whether or not the leader made positive actions for the people while in office. A downfall of democratic leadership is the way leaders can put their promises into action. The goal of creating new propositions is to benefit the people as a whole, not just individual entities. This can create problems because not everyone will feel like their problems are being heard or solved by the people they elect to do so. “The point of democratic elections is to find people worthy of the people’s trust. When the people succumb to unalloyed mistrust, democracy loses its capacity to serve their interests” (Galston 115). The people will always be weary of leaders who are seen to exercise too much power over the will of the people. The people are quick to lose trust in a leader and are difficult to fully satisfy because one false move by a leader will put the people on edge and begin an uphill battle for the leader to regain that trust. “This was not government by the people, but government approved by the people” ( Kane 28). Citizens can not ultimately expect a leader to fully represent their characteristics or interests, this is a downfall to democratic leadership because what the people may want could differ from what leaders see as being fit.
Conclusion
	The common resolution for the downfalls of democratic leadership is to allow the people to be more involved with the decisions that impact them the most. However, this resolution would in turn be a means to an end for leadership in democracy which is not as realistic in practice as it is in theory. “What is lacking is a body of theory that provides, or attempts to provide, a reasoned explanation of, and foundation for, the role of leadership in representative democracies” (Kane 27).  Without an outline of what democratic leadership should be ideally, problems arise as representative democracies navigate the balance of power between the people and their elected representatives. Democracies will continue to ride the fine line of power within their leaders, the more strongly democratic leaders lead, the less democratic they will appear to the citizens, the more the leaders stand behind democracy, the less like true leaders they seem.


